Mapserver Training Notes

(c) 2009 Linfiniti Consulting cc.

%! target       : html
%! style        : style.css
%! Options      : --toc --toc-level 3 --enum-title --css-sugar --css-inside
%! preproc      : TUT_URL   https://qgis.org
%! PostProc(html): '(?i)(<pre>)' '<div class="code">\1'
%! PostProc(html): '(?i)(</pre>)' '\1</div>'
%! encoding: iso-8859-1
% These are comments and will not be generated in any output
% -------------------

%This document is in text2tags format. You can generate html, plain text and
%moinmoin formatted documentation by running txt2tags on this document. See the
%txt2tags home page for more details.  Please insert manual line breaks in this
%document as it makes diffing for changes much easier. To do this in vim 
%automatically, select a section then issue (gq) command. Please dont
%apply vim formatting to the whol document as it screws up some formatting
%rather apply it selectively to paragraphs where needed.

% To generate the text version of this document:
% txt2tags -t txt -o django_training django_training.t2t
% To generate the moinmoin version of this document
% txt2tags -t moin -o django_training.moin  django_training.t2t
% To generate the html version of this document
% txt2tags -t html -o django_training.html django_training.t2t

% End of comments
% -------------------

= Introducing Mapserver =

== What is it? ==

```
MapServer is an Open Source platform for publishing spatial data and 
interactive mapping applications to the web. Originally developed in 
the mid-1990’s at the University of Minnesota, MapServer is released 
under an MIT-style license, and runs on all major platforms (Windows, 
Linux, Mac OS X).

   -- http://mapserver.org/
```



== Installation ==

Under ubuntu do :

```
sudo apt-get install cgi-mapserver python-mapscript
```


The python mapscript module above is not strictly needed - 
it will be used for testing our map files.

For the above mentioned testing, you should also install mapfile 
tools plugin using the QGIS python plugin manager (you need to 
enable 3rd party repositories first).

== Installing some test data into PostGIS ==

```
#!/bin/bash
createdb mapserver
createlang plpgsql mapserver
psql mapserver < /usr/share/postgresql/8.4/contrib/postgis-1.5/postgis.sql
psql mapserver < /usr/share/postgresql/8.4/contrib/postgis-1.5/spatial_ref_sys.sql
```

== Making your first map file ==

Lets dive right in!

```

```


== Testing ==

GetCapabilities

```
http://localhost/cgi-bin/mapserv?map=/tmp/world.map&request=getCapabilities&service=wms&version=1.1.0
```
